# client-server-dev-snhu
Repository for coursework for CS-340 Client/Server Development

The objective of this project was to create a full stack web application. MongoDB is used to access a provided .CSV file. A custom Python module implements CRUD (create, read, update, delete (operations). Finally, the Dash framework is used to implement a web application that utilizes the custom Python module to provide the user with database filtering and querying options, as well as visual feedback in the form of a pie chart and geolocation map.

Reflection Questions:

**How do you write programs that are maintainable, readable, and adaptable? Especially consider your work on the CRUD Python module from Project One, which you used to connect the dashboard widgets to the database in Project Two. What were the advantages of working in this way? How else could you use this CRUD Python module in the future?**

The best way, in my experience, to write maintainable, readable, and adaptable code is to break a large, complex task into smaller, simpler, discrete operations, and then develop code that carries out those smaller operations. For example, the CRUD Python module, used as middleware between MongoDB and Dash in this project, implements just four simple operations: Create, Read, Update, and Delete operations on a database. These operations are not specific to this particular project -- any database implementation will benefit from this functionality. So, the CRUD module developed for this project can easily be adapted to a variety of other purposes. Breaking complex tasks into smaller operations also makes code more maintainable and readable, as a collection of methods that each perform a simple task is easier to read and maintain than a large, convoluted program developed using so-called "spaghetti code". This also ties into the concept of loose coupling vs tight coupling. It is generally preferable to have code that is loosely coupled, so that each individual component does not depend on, or require knowledge of, the specific definition or implementation of any other component. This makes it easier to maintain or replace a component without affecting other components that utilize it. Finally, of course, code can be made more maintainable, readable, and adaptable through use of appropriately descriptive method and variable names (self-documenting code), and concise but instructive comments where necessary.

**How do you approach a problem as a computer scientist? Consider how you approached the database or dashboard requirements that Grazioso Salvare requested. How did your approach to this project differ from previous assignments in other courses? What techniques or strategies would you use in the future to create databases to meet other client requests?**

Again, the concept of breaking a large, complex task into smaller operations is critical here. In addition, it is valuable to make use of an established design pattern when creating a solution to a problem. For example, this program is built with the MVC (Model-View-Controller) pattern, in which the Model represents the actual data being handled by the program, the View represents the user interface and output, and the Controller represents the operations that use the provided user input from the View to access or modify the Model. In this program, the Model is the MongoDB database, the View is the Dash GUI elements that accept user input and provide visual output, and the Controller is the Python middleware that accesses the data, as well as the Dash callbacks that implement queries on that data.

The functional requirements for this project were straightforward:
1. A database implementation with full CRUD functionality
2. A user-facing dashboard to implement custom filters and queries on the database, as well as to provide visual output of the data
  * Specific filters were required to search for animals suitable for various types of rescue training
  * Data output was required in table format, as well as a graphical chart and a geolocation map
 
Considering these requirements, development of the project began with the database and CRUD operations, which were implemented using MongoDB and PyMongo. Next, construction of the Dash GUI began, first implementing simple data queries on the database. Once the framework was established to connect the frontend Dash dashboard to the backend database, the more complex querying and user interface elements were implemented, at which point all requirements were met and the project was delivered.

Compared to other projects and assignments developed in previous courses, this is the clearest and most instructive example of a project that integrates separate components into a complete full stack application. The process of building the application in stages, starting with the backend database and then connecting it to the frontend components, has provided me with greater context and familiarity regarding the steps needed to take a client's problem and turn it into a software solution. In particular, the specific techniques and tools used in this project have seemed highly effective and versatile. In future projects, I will strongly consider both MongoDB/PyMongo and Dash for database and UI/analytics applications.

**What do computer scientists do, and why does it matter? How would your work on this type of project help a company, like Grazioso Salvare, to do their work better?**

As stated above, one way to describe what computer scientists do is "take a client's problem and turn it into a software solution". As such, the processes of requirements gathering and definition are critical steps in the software development life cycle. Understanding not just what a client wants, but why they want it, can lead to enhanced insight into the types of solutions that could be achieved. One extremely simple example is my decision to exclude Euthanized animals from query results. This was not part of the client's requirements, but is a clear way that the program can be enhanced to better meet the client's needs. In general, software developers help clients to do their work better by working to truly understand the client's goals, and then developing the best software solution possible to achieve those goals.

